The catering industry and the restaurant industry are on the verge of tremendous transformations, associated primarily with the advent of new food production technologies and innovative solutions in the design of technological equipment. Speaking about the quality of service provision today, first of all, one should keep in mind clear, understandable, transparent standards of service. Ideally, they should be created at the planning stage of the restaurant, be present in both network and independent establishments.
The most frequently implemented in the restaurant business are the standards of the series ISO 9000, ISO 22000, ISO 14000, OHSAS. They are based on a process approach; therefore, the introduction of international standards and total quality management (TQM) in catering enterprises will improve both the quality of products and technological processes, as well as after-sales service. To achieve a genuine and long-term competitive advantage, TQM must be adopted as a fundamental principle.
Indirectly, TQM is focused on the knowledge and consideration of the needs of internal customers, personnel, on which the success of the organization depends to a greater extent. Only people can ensure quality, and their role is vital to improving quality.
Nutrition is one of the main factors that determines the state of human health, and also prevents or, conversely, contributes to the development of diseases. Modern medicine is faced with diseases, the occurrence of which mainly depends on the way of life and especially the quality and nature of nutrition. Nutrition science is an established body of knowledge about food and its preparation at the junction of several sciences at once ‑ chemistry, physics, and biology.
Work with food in any case remains a specific area of activity, because gastronomy itself puts forward a lot of requirements, many of which are sanitary in nature. Food should be harmless and safe, as healthy as possible, and containing as many substances useful to the human body as possible. This is precisely what companies working in this field are aiming for.
Information on the composition and consumer properties of the products allows the process engineer to correctly solve the problem of rational use of raw materials and serve as important criteria for the justification and organization of technological processes. Knowledge of biochemistry is necessary to control biochemical processes in the manufacture of catering products, to control the quality of raw materials and culinary products.
When organizing a balanced diet, one should be guided by the requirements of physiology; take into account the needs for essential nutritional components for various populations; apply differentiated approach to the use of food components.
Residents of modern cities prefer healthy life style. Concepts such as proper balanced nutrition and detox drinks have long gone beyond nutrition science and have become an integral part of our lives. This trend was picked up by catering establishments. At the same time, a healthy diet is not like a diet in its usual sense; the use of eco-, bio- or popular farm products also does not mean the right menu (Coles, 2013).
From a business perspective, the segment of healthy food restaurants is extremely complex and, unfortunately, there are examples of failed launch projects. At first, healthy nutrition was associated with dietary tables in sanatoriums, then with environmentally friendly products and gentle cooking technologies, and partly with vegetarianism and raw food diet. Today, trends in healthy eating are associated with the prospects for the concept of “green” restaurants.
The consumer requires a medical approach and good gastronomy. In the kitchen, it is important to evaluate the following components: the origin of the products, the method of their storage and preparation, the absence of flavour enhancers and other additives, food compatibility and calorie content. It is necessary to involve a professional nutritionist in the development of the menu in order to create dishes in tandem with the chefs, balanced by microelements, influencing the body at the cellular level and accelerating metabolic processes.
New establishments are opening up, attracting guests with unique services, an unusual atmosphere, improved service systems, and unusual cooking technologies. To retain customers and attract new guests, it is necessary to develop unique products. In this case, the owners of institutions turn to the system of innovation.
Regarding innovative cooking technologies, they include molecular cuisine, the peculiarity of which is the combination of food products, the latest technology and molecular chemistry; foodpairing technique based on a combination of various products with a common taste component; fusion as a culinary system based on mixing styles of traditional culinary preferences (Mozaffarian, Rosenberg, and Uauy, 2018). Also, the latest technology is widespread in the products processing system. Sous Vide technology allows cooking food without air, i.e., under vacuum. This technology helps to obtain high quality products, reduce losses during heat treatment and increase the shelf life of products.
In addition, today molecular gastronomy is considered one of the scientific areas in the food sciences (along with food safety, food microbiology, food engineering, food chemistry, food technology, and others), the object of study of which is scientific research on food preparation processes, as well as social and artistic research in this area (Sivakumaran, 2018).